all knowledge is conjectural it could
possibly be false we after all the
fallible human beings flawed and prone
to error mariah the laws of physics
mandate that we cannot possibly have
knowledge of all possible factors that
might come to bear on any situation now
this is a consequence of quantum theory
and also things decay a consequence of
the second law of thermodynamics so our
knowledge is necessarily incomplete and
subject to errors creeping in overtime
so the laws of physics themselves
constrain what it is possible to know
and how there's no Royal Road to truth
knowledge is hard-won and the method by
which it is one is by a critical method
our guess is about reality are tested
out there in the physical world subject
to scrutiny and experiment argument and
a collision with natural phenomena our
buildings instantiate our knowledge of
engineering and when the earth moves in
an earthquake our theories of
construction are put through trials if
the building collapses in a way
unforeseen we learn something and we
learn at the hard way
now knowledge is objective in two senses
first in the ontological sense the
objects out there have a real existence
they are separate from us and not mere
products of our mind stars would
continue to shine and birds tweet even
if no people had ever evolved anywhere
in the universe to observe any of it
knowledge is out there in objects in the
DNA of a bird knowledge exists to build
a bird in our built environment we
instantiate our knowledge of how matter
can be shaped and controlled to bend to
our will so we take silicon and crafted
into lenses and metal and form it into
cylinders and we place the lenses at
just the right distance from each other
and we build a telescope we instantiate
the knowledge literally the laws of
physics the laws of optics as well as in
chemistry into the physical world into
the telescope the knowledge is out there
in the world not merely in our own minds
or all the people who ever learned to
build telescopes suddenly lost to us but
not the telescopes all the knowledge of
how to build a telescope would not be
lost an interest a child coming across
such a device this metal cylinder with a
few bits of shape
glass and perhaps in mirrors inside
could find that it could bring into
focus distant objects and correctly
aligned and fitted with a bit and with
more investigation determine that the
lenses have special shapes and are a
careful distance apart from each other
and that the cylinder itself serves a
special purpose in so on in other words
almost all the knowledge to build the
telescope is right there in the
telescope now I'm going to be reading
this book objective knowledge by Karl
Popper
an evolutionary approach and the reason
I'm doing this is there's been a few
interesting internet phenomena that have
been going on lately and I think it's
probably useful to analyze those in
light of what popper has said now
returning to my telescope sure there's
going to be matters of geology if the
child want to start from absolute
scratch and gathering the silicon and
the metal from their ores and perhaps
there is some in explicit knowledge as
well and the building of the telescope
that might make things easier but in
truth in principle in a practice anyone
is really curious and it came across a
telescope could learn to build a
telescope even if there was no-one else
alive who knew what was interested in
doing so and this is ignoring that
anyone so interested would have access
to library than the Internet and all the
results has ever accumulate on telescope
building
so this labelling astir to say knowledge
is out there in objects its objective in
that sense subjectivity exists that is
our experience of the world our synonym
for that poorly understood concept of
consciousness but knowledge insofar as
it is there at all is not of the same
time we shall come to that momentarily
so I think I've laid at that point
enough I'm just saying that knowledge is
out there in objects it is objective in
that sense now our personal subjectivity
of course exists we have an experience
of the world
our experience of the world or our
subjectivity that's just a synonym for
that poorly understood concept that we
call consciousness and so subjective
knowledge in
so far as it exists at all is not of the
same type as objective knowledge and
we'll come to that momentarily but
there's another a sense in which
knowledge is objective knowledge is
tested by a critical method when someone
makes a claim there are tests there are
criticisms there are criteria against
which we judge the knowledge claim the
tests can be more or less rigorous but
valid critical tests are not me matters
of opinion but rather encounters with
reality and other knowledge were already
out there so a scientist who claims that
they have determined a way let's say for
humans to travel through space beyond
the speed of light well we can test this
claim indeed we can try to build their
device or implement their theory and
therefore try and refute the claim that
way we often don't need to do this
however but if the test did show the
claim to be false well so much for the
claim often what we do is we just put
that claim alongside the best
alternatives which for now is Einstein's
theory of special relativity we could
use the general theory but I don't think
we need to get more complicated than
necessary
now that theory the special theory
explains what happens as your speed
increases to near the speed of light it
actually it was applicable for all
speeds but the phenomena that unusual
are most obvious when you get to the
higher speeds when you do start to get
near to the speed of light time outside
of the moving frame slows down with
respect to time for the person who is
moving so you're zipping along near the
speed of light and you look outside of
the frame in which you are if it happen
to be a rocket ship
you just look outside the rocket ship
tit and you would notice that all the
processes going on outside the rocket
ship particularly of clocks the aging of
people and so on are happening at a rate
slower than what is going on inside the
rocket everything seems normal inside
the rocket everything outside the rocket
seems to have slowed down so time
outside of the moving frame slows down
with respect to time for the person who
is moving and object moving at the speed
of light like light itself actually gets
places in zero time time outside the
frame of a photon of light stops so
going faster than this would mean going
on time and that raises all sorts of
problems and those problems that are
raised will not be solved by this new
claim that you can move faster than the
speed light and so on that basis we can
refute the fast and light theory
moreover moving a mass like person to
the speed of light requires an infinite
amount of energy so that's another
criticism of the new claim
so the claim is going to fail any test
it's going to be unable to answer
questions about what happens to time and
energy and it is simply going to fare as
an exceedingly poor rival to what
already exists the explanatory theory
that he is the special theory of
relativity
so it's encounter with the world has
been has caused it to be refuted by an
objective set of criteria it has failed
to do what it purported to and this is
no one individuals near opinion it is a
fact about what has happened in reality
with that new claim this is objectivity
in the epistemological sense it's not a
matter of opinion or bias that would be
subjective in the epistemological sense
and her desires knowledge in that sense
who wants knowledge to just be about
opinion and bias so so much for the
misconception of subjective knowledge
but this doesn't entirely rule out
subjective knowledge but we need to be
cautious because subjectivity exists
your consciousness exists we have a mind
we've got an internal life a
consciousness our thoughts and
expectations are confined solely to our
own minds so they are in the sense kind
of subjective knowledge but what is its
nature a popper wrote on this and so let
me make a few remarks and a few
quotations I provided key locations
subjective knowledge will come to see is
knowledge that exists solely within a
single organism in some way suffice it
to say for now it's not knowledge of a
conscious sort popper will explain but
rather an unconscious client so for
example the knowledge that's in DNA we
will see that conscious subjective
knowledge does not exist but it is also
important to dwell upon the idea that
subjective knowledge of the Klein
expanded by many philosophers is simply
a mistake and a down
Plato and in many ways uncritically
consumed by generations of teachers
academics scientists and other thinkers
Plato was the one who demanded that
knowledge count only as knowledge when
it was justified true belief or JTB now
elsewhere I do deal with why knowledge
cannot be justified why we should not
expect it to be true and why it cannot
be about belief so you can go to my blog
post on seeking truth where I attempt to
criticize all three parts of that the
Platonic ideal of knowledge being
justified it's not justified true it's
not true and it's not about belief
either but for now I'll just concentrate
on the belief part and explore this
notion a little bit more deeply a little
bit more broadly belief it is if it is
anything is something that people can
have or conscious creatures might have
but books
and telescopes do not as we've already
seen objects out there in the real world
from DNA to books to buildings and
telescopes instantiate knowledge DNA
instantiates the knowledge of how to
build an organism the DNA doesn't have
beliefs so at the bare minimum the
knowledge there has absolutely nothing
whatever to do with belief so we've
already ruled out this JTP conception of
knowledge but what about belief in
people now popper is the most underrated
lost through the 20th century although
in recent years with the rise of some
critical rationalist groups on the
Internet which I think it's a wonderful
so we've seen a wonderful surge in
interest more positive remarks have been
made about popper but he still dismissed
as something like you know that guy who
said that science is about falsification
and not confirmation and that amounted
to the very smallest portion of what his
overall philosophy was about a crucial
part of necessary part but that it's
certainly not sufficient to provide a
good understanding of what his entire
world he was about he did remarkably
more than just a falsification so let us
turn now to some of his remarks on the
even subjective knowledge and I'll make
comments where I think they might be
useful these quotes are as I've already
said from this book objective knowledge
an evolutionary approach this is a 1983
edition quote what we have to do is
start from the fact that objective
scientific knowledge is conjectural and
then look for its analog in the field of
subjective knowledge this analog can be
easily identified it is my thesis that
subjective knowledge is part of our
highly complex and intricate in a
healthy organism astonishingly accurate
apparatus of adjustment and that it
works in the main like objective
knowledge by the method of trial and
elimination of error or by conjecture
refutation and self correction auto
correction this is on page 77 later
quote I used to take pride in the fact
that I am NOT a belief philosopher I'm
primarily interested in ideas in
theories and I find a comparatively
unimportant whether or not anyone
believes them and I suspect the interest
of philosophers in believed arises from
that mistake and philosophy which I call
inductive ISM there are theorists of
knowledge and starting from the
subjective experiences they fail to
distinguish between objective and
subjective knowledge this leads them to
believe in belief as the genesis of
which knowledge is a species so popper
then goes on to say that this this
species from which the knowledge can be
derived is something like justification
or a criterion of truth such as clarity
or distinctness or vivacity or
sufficient reason that's what provides
the difference between knowledge and
belief that's what purposes then quote
from Papa this is why like Ian Foster I
do not believe in belief end quote
popper thing goes on to explain how
there are other reasons for being
skeptical of belief he admits there are
psychological states that might be
called expectations and there are shades
of these where we might expect things in
some brights and so for example you
might have looked at the timetable and
the buses did or
3:22 'let's 321 right now and you've
checked your phone and on the phone you
can see the bus is about to come as well
so you expect that it's 322 there will
be the bus in front of you and so that's
a very bright sense in which you really
do have this expectation and then
there's this other sense that's sort of
more demon sense that you know perhaps
you'll get you'll get sick at some point
but before you die you'll get some
serious illness so you in some sense you
don't really want it to happen and
you're not really believing it that this
is expectation that this is what happens
to people before they die they tend to
get sick at some point so you have this
this gray scale of expectations all the
way from you expect it strongly in some
sense through to you you kind of know it
will happen but sort of a distant dim
phenomenon mental phenomena so some
things are immediate and pressing the
mind strongly in some list so popper
says these things do not amount to
beliefs but will be taken seriously by
someone who takes induction seriously
and of course he does not on page 71 pop
event flashes as thoughts on subjective
knowledge some more here he speaks about
our subjective knowledge is a
dispositional and expectational thing
and that this knowledge which exists in
the genes of an organism is in large
measure inborn so this is a refutation
of the blank slate people much has been
made of Steven Pinker speaking recently
writing books indeed about retort to the
blank slater's popper was there decades
ago quote from popper all acquired
knowledge all learning consists of the
modification possibly the rejection of
some form of knowledge or disposition
which was there previously and in the
last instance consists of inborn
dispositions popper then goes on to say
quote from the point of view here
reached we must reject as complete
the baseless any subjectivist
epistemology which proposes to choose as
a starting point what appears to it
quite on unproblematic that is a direct
or immediate observational experiences
they are not absolutely reliable here
let us leave Papa for a moment and come
to the present day which speaking on May
the 18th 2018 the Internet has been
abuzz in recent days with a number of
auditory hallucinations I'm going to
provide here my favorite let me watch
the clip you should watch it at least
four times I'll display it months for
you so you need to rewind this video
clearly or can't find it on YouTube when
you listen to the following audio you
need to listen out for four permutations
of the following set of words the first
time you listen listen out for the word
brain storm brain stone then listen out
for the word green needle then listen
for brain needle and finally listen for
grains for green store
now almost everyone I've tested on
tested this on tested on scores of
people at this point seems to be able to
hear all four permutations with more or
less it now what this suggests well it
turns out observations are dearie Laden
to use Papa's jargon or to return to our
present analysis we have some
expectations these expectations are root
something to do with inborn ideas of
genetic wiring that causes our hearing
to be sensitive to particular
frequencies we modified those as we
learned language they're now deeply
ingrained and so in context as an
English speaker would could be primed to
hear certain things we have expectations
theories and those theories affect what
is observed the real world is out there
for us to test but the meaning we find
is shaped by our interpretations of it
let me return now to popper on page 72
where he has just said we can reject
this idea that we must begin our
creation of lodge without direct
intermediate observational experiences
because they are not absolutely reliable
as we have just seen after all what did
you hear in that audio what you hear
what you heard depends entirely upon the
theory operating in your mind at any
given moment
you may even here's something else
entirely if you try Papa says on page 73
now quote our observations are highly
complex and not always reliable though
astonishingly excellent decoding zuv the
signals that reach us from the
environment
they must not therefore be elevated to a
starting point in the sense of a
standard of truth thus what appeared as
an apparently preposition presupposition
free subjectivist epistemology or tabula
rasa browser Theory disintegrates
completely in its place we have to erect
a theory of knowledge in which the
nulling subject the observer plays an
important but only a very restricted
role in code now his next section of the
book is chapter strain it's called
knowledge in the object its sense and
I'll quote again the common sense theory
of knowledge and with it all or almost
all philosophers until at least Balaam's
Bolzano in Frager took it for granted
that
there's only one kind of knowledge
knowledge possessed by some knowing
subject I will call this kind of
knowledge subjective knowledge in spite
of the fact that as we shall see genuine
or unadulterated or purely subjective
conscious knowledge simply does not
exist
subjective knowledge in the unconscious
sense of Endicott subject technology in
the unconscious sense consists of the
dispositions of an organism so for
example when you hear brainstorm earlier
on your sensation of this is subjective
it can't be shared but you know you
heard it right and yet you can also be
mistaken about what you heard because a
moment later and you hear the same thing
but it's green needle so you can be
mistaken about your own Collyer there's
an unconscious dimension to this
consciously you can tell yourself okay
listen for brainstorm and you'll hear
brainstorm you consciously tell your
unconscious to do your bidding in this
way objective knowledge is out there in
the real world objective knowledge is
published in books and instantiated in
objects like cars and technology it is
the kind of thing that can be
transmitted but your personal knowledge
of the brain is daunting not like it's
what's called polio the subjective
character of different perceptions
beginning on page 106 popper has a
chapter titles epistemology without a
knowing subject here popper defends a
conception of reality where one we can
consider the existence of objects out
there in the physical world - we can
consider our own mental state and
finally three we can consider objective
knowledge which I would say are the
explanations published in books and so
on that articulate the connection
between things now this world 3 as it's
sometimes called I might refer to the
world but this third kind of structure
knowledge objective knowledge is
not only of science but also mathematics
and art and poetry it is things apart
from just our conscious experience of
them things that have an existence but
they are more than the mere matter in
which they appear so what poem isn't
just marks of ink on a paper or life in
pixels on a computer screen or sound
waves in the air when someone recites
the time or movement of electrons in a
while and some are amplifiers transmits
and records it the poem has an existence
that is simply not reducible to its
physical instantiation in any particular
copy the deparment itself is identical
no matter what the instantiation is
errors side so knowledge really is about
this third kind of thing and not about
the second kind of thing the mental
objects things so you've got physical
objects out there in the real world
mental objects inside of your mind
but the third kind of thing knowledge
which is the relationship between those
things out there in the real world it
hasn't had much to do with number two it
doesn't have much to do with mental
events going on inside of your mind
mental states experiences consciousness
they're real just as real as one the
physical world but in a very analogous
way in which knowledge cannot be found
in the physical world has nothing but
atoms and particles or vibrations in
instead has an abstract matrix of
pattern in those things but not
reducible to forces laws of motion in
physics or motion of particles it cannot
be found solely in mental experience
either ensured it is neither pure matter
or pure mental and indeed looking in
either of those places exclusively and
attempting to reduce knowledge to the
mental of whatever material is a mistake
in both cases physical objects and
mental experiences we find crucial
components for the creation
representation and use of knowledge the
physical objects form the media upon
which we record our knowledge and also
it is the raw material
cereals in which we instantiate our
knowledge the city grows in the rocks
and forests and resources that we gather
together but it only happens in the
presence of the right knowledge and the
mental world of our experience the
consciousness of people is where the
knowledge is experienced and used to
solve problems both your personal
problems and problems broadly now
somebody asked me recently
why is subjectivity considered risk so
knowledge what assumptions underlying
that claim
well how also they asked how and in what
way is the subjectivity impact knowledge
acquisition and and named some areas of
knowledge where this is relevant okay so
here's my answer to that subjectivity
isn't a risk to knowledge knowledge
after all is objective so it's kind of
impervious to what's going on inside of
someone's personal subjectivity but the
claim or rather the demand that
knowledge we consider that as subjective
is dangerous because it leads to
relativism in the epistemological sense
subjective knowledge is just your
opinion
so if knowledge is like that then our
attempts to converge upon the truth will
fail we'll all just be going our own way
and with no criteria for making progress
and sorting what is true from what is
false what is good what is evil what
it's beautiful from what is ugly and so
on there is a harmless way in which
there is a species of knowledge which is
subjective all organisms have their own
individual DNA so your DNA is different
to mine and everyone else's on the
planet and all of ours is different or
cats and that's different to what a fish
has this genetic knowledge provides us
with our experience of the world for
example I can look outside right now and
I can see a clear blue sky and the color
that I see depends upon the
concentration operation of cells called
cones and rods in the retina of my mind
this concentration of cones that I have
determines the vibrancy of the color
that I might see I might for example
have six million two hundred thirty-four
thousand four hundred and fifty four
cones and that has been predetermined by
the DNA the genes that are inside the
nucleus
of each of my cells now you might have
not six million two hundred and thirty
four thousand four hundred fifty four
County you might have six million nine
hundred and eighty four thousand five
hundred sixty-six colors and in both
cases it's to do with our DNA this is
what we are born with in large parts to
do with that DNA modulo mutations that
happen throughout the course of our life
or whatever so you know you see a
certain caliber when you see the sky but
mine might be ever so slightly different
because the cells that are sensitive to
color well we've got a different number
of them a different concentration of
them maybe they're arranged and the
written slightly differently all of this
gives our perception of a visual
perception of the world a slightly
different character hence also the way
in which we hear that brainstorm Green
needle thing our ears will also be
different because the number of cilia
the little sensitive hair cells they're
inside a copy of our ears they might be
slightly different so popper dealt with
how subjectivity impacts knowledge
acquisition
he said all acquired knowledge all
learning consists of the modification
possibly the rejection of some form of
knowledge or disposition which was there
previously and in the last instance of
our inborn dispositions end quote so we
start with some inborn ideas and then we
adapt these over time as we learn more
and more that this happens in our
conscious mind is the subjective
component but of course the actual
learning is an encounter with the real
world the physical world kicks back and
our ideas are sometimes refuted and by
that means we learn but then encounter
with the real physical world of objects
out there is an objective process it's
not your mere opinion but it turned out
that when you were making toast this
morning and thought you'd leave it on
for five minutes that when it came out
black and burned and charred well that's
not no mere opinion you learn that five
minutes is too long to leave bread on to
toast acquisition learning of this kind
is subtly different to that which goes
on in let's say science although
acquisition begins in a mind
subjectively of course
and so science in a sense begins in the
mind of the scientist with a creative
conjecture but then it's subject to
robust criticism from other people and
from the world and then it's no longer a
matter of personal subjective experience
it is objective and it is only objective
knowledge through its encounters with
the real world they're kicking back from
things outside of our mind that
analytically improve
I cannot improve my knowledge of the
color of the sky by simply staring more
and more at it and reflecting an integer
introspective that subjective experience
is just a part of me my subjective state
of mind isn't something that I have
control of in that sense I can be
mistaken about my subjectivity of course
but it is within if I want to improve it
I'll need to communicate with others and
try to refute my own ID but for now
qualia sensations of blue for example
cannot be communicated between people
but this is no great obstacle for most
of the questions that occupy us for now
David Deutsch following Karl Popper has
emphasized how object different
knowledge is what allows progress and
progress that is unbounded this growth
of knowledge has nothing to do with
belief thinking that something is
actually true or somehow guessing that
something is likely to be the case no
none of that is required knowledge
always remains provisional even though
it is objective indeed because it is
objective it can always be subject to
error and correction and that's able to
be improved popper enjoys really have
given us an optimistic vision of how
knowledge growers we should take their
ideas seriously